---
title: The State of Static Site Generators
author: Nathan Rijksen
date: 2014-05-28
tags: [static site generators, website, docpad]
description: In this blog post I go over my own introduction to static site generators, what I like about them, what I dislike about them and where I think the future will (or should) take us.
layout: blog
---

I've been a web developer for over a decade now, and have in that time
experienced my fair share of CMS woes. I've gone through the stages of using,
extending, creating and ultimately dismissing it all. You name a CMS and I will
most likely have played with it to some extend; not because I love CMSes (the
contrary), but because of my insatiable desire for a CMS that just WORKS.

After years of searching, using, extending and creating I ultimately quite
literally dismissed it all in favour of what is essentially plain HTML. Like
many I started playing with static site generators, first not quite "getting it",
then having my "aha" moment and eventually wanting to use it for just about
anything. I went from years of developing and extending advanced and overly
involved CMSes to plainly just "using my content".

## Using Your Content

This is the main difference I see between using a CMS and a static site
generator; you are controlling your content, rather than controlling a system
which then controls your content. When you write a blog post for a static site
generator you have full control over how you want that blog post to appear to
users. You want to write it in markdown, include a bit of custom javascript and
have your own sidebar? It's a bit unusual, but sure - have at it! It's a breeze
with a static site generator because you don't have to teach some over-arching
system how to make sense of what you're doing. You control your content THROUGH
your content, rather than controlling your content through a system which is
biased in many ways and leaves you struggling to implement things the way you
envisioned them.

## So What Is a Static Site Generator?

A static site generator is exactly what it's name implies; it is a "generator"
which pieces your site together, based on your instructions. Like a CMS it is
just a concept, there are many implementations. [This website][1] for example
is [generated by DocPad][2], but there [are many alternatives][3].

Essentially you create your site by writing your articles in (for example)
markdown, and providing some meta data with your article, eg. the date, title
and the "layout" that it should use. The layout can be a simple HTML file which
includes your JavaScript, CSS and a reference to where your article should, not
unlike the way you would have a template in a CMS. The difference here is that
it's all handled from your filesystem and with your actual content (the article)
as the main driver of how everything ought to be generated.

## Not For Everyone

Now I can already see many people reading this thinking "but what about the
clients?" or similar thoughts. The simple fact is that static site generators
are not for everyone, and will never replace the huge selection of CMSes
available. It is simply a new alternative with a limited applicability. For
example static site generators in their current state are mostly unable to cope
with large databases of data; they ARE able to handle it, but since the entire
site is generated each time you modify eg. a layout file it has to regenerate
every single page of your website, whereas with a CMS this is done on-demand
(which also has it's pros and cons).

## Current Limitations

So it's likely not a good idea to use a static site generator for a huge site
without having a strong gameplan for handling the issues you will be facing down
the road. You'll also want to be cautious about using a static site generator
for websites containing a lot of dynamic (user generated) or session specific
data, because your website is generated only once and needs to be suitable to
all visitors at any given time of the day. You could work around this by "filling
in the blanks" with AJAXed data, but search bots will not pick up on this data
and so your SEO will be negatively affected.

Another issue I found is developing using a static site generator can severely
reduce your productivity, because something as simple as modifying a CSS rule
or changing an attribute in your layout file will cause your site to regenerate
and so you cannot instantly review your changes.

## The Solution

Most of these limitations seem to boil down to the same issue; regeneration is
costly. This isn't an issue for most CMSes, since pages are generated in
real-time (when you visit a page on a website, it is generated at that time for
your specific visit). Can't we meet somewhere in the middle though? Actually,
we can! The way I see it most static site generators are essentially a very
strong caching system, there is no reason we can't invalidate our content at
runtime and have it regenerate for one reason or another - but we don't want our
entire site to regenerate every time!

So what if we borrow a little bit from the CMS systems, we preserve the static
site generator functionality, but we add a small dynamic piece in between which
simply checks whether our content is still up-to-date or whether it needs to be
regenerated, then either passes off the request to the up-to-date static file or
re-generates the file on the fly.

But - how can we regenerate a file on the fly if the entire site is being
regenerated and we therefore have to wait for this entire process to finish?
Well why does the entire site need to be regenerated? Because files are
inter-connected, that's why! Do'h. But hold on, can't we intelligently decide
"which" files are connected, and prioritize the generation of the file that we
actually need, whilst letting the rest of the files regenerate in the background
without bothering the end-user? We totally can! And this is what I would like to
see happen in the future, and is something that [has already been recognized
(to an extend) in DocPad][4] and likely in other static site generators as well.

## The Future

So for me, the future is very bright. I don't anticipate that I won't ever touch
a CMS again; as I said static site generators do not replace them, they merely
offer an alternative approach which will be relevant in some cases, and not in
others. And I look forward to seeing their relevancy increase.


  [1]: https://github.com/Komodo/komodo-website
  [2]: http://docpad.org
  [3]: http://www.staticgen.com/
  [4]: https://github.com/bevry/docpad/issues/336
